{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 Stage A Staging Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa300\f0\fs22 Abstract Refactor for Principled Geometry Presets\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b Purpose\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 This short staging plan breaks the Abstract Refactor into small mergeable steps. The goal is to introduce the preset/module-geometry architecture without changing model behaviour except where explicitly gated by tests.\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 Stage A should not implement MLP_BLOCK, HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK, BLOCK, or DCT. It should preserve DENSE and prove that the current legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL behaviour can pass through the new abstraction seam.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A0. Preflight audit\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Confirm current materialization paths in sheet/model.py, sheet/trajectory.py, sheet/geometry.py, and sheet/basis.py.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Capture current legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL parameter counts, family names, tensor shapes, and one deterministic materialization fixture.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Confirm how fused nanoGPT c_attn currently packs Q/K/V and how attention heads are packed inside attention projections.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add or refresh tests that lock current behaviour before refactoring internals.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 Baseline tests pass and there is a fixture proving the refactor preserved legacy SHEET_COL materialization.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A1. Config, presets, and overrides\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add validated config fields: geometry_preset, attention_geometry, mlp_geometry, and basis_family.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add preset constants: CURVE, MLP_BLOCK, and BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add underlying module-geometry constants: attention curve, attention head_aware_block, MLP curve, and MLP mlp_block.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Implement preset expansion: CURVE -> curve + curve; MLP_BLOCK -> curve + mlp_block; BLOCK -> head_aware_block + mlp_block.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Allow explicit attention_geometry and mlp_geometry invocation for ablations, even when presets are the common path.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Record requested preset and resolved module geometries in run metadata.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 DENSE and current compact smoke runs still start. Invalid combinations hard-fail early. Preset expansion and explicit overrides are tested.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A2. Basis-kernel interface\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Introduce a basis-kernel registry keyed by basis_family and basis_version.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Move current Chebyshev construction and QR stabilization into the CHEBY kernel.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep the generated CHEBY basis numerically equivalent to the current basis for the same sample_count, order, dtype, and device.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Ensure cache keys include basis_family, basis_version, sample_count, order, dtype, and device.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep basis buffers out of checkpoints and optimizers.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 CHEBY basis tests pass for shape, cache separation, device/dtype movement, non-persistence, and Gram error. No DCT implementation yet.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A3. Axis and family metadata\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Replace SHEET-specific metadata with semantic tensor-family specs.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Represent attention_query_weight, attention_key_weight, attention_value_weight, attention_output_weight, mlp_expansion_weight, and mlp_contraction_weight as distinct semantic families.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Mark qkv_role and attention head index as categorical axes that must not receive smooth compact bases.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Represent MLP clean axes for later MLP_BLOCK, but do not implement MLP_BLOCK yet.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Represent attention head partitions for later HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK, but do not implement HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK yet.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Mark LayerNorm and bias vectors as conventional/tiny for the initial version.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 Family reports show semantic attention/MLP matrix families separately from conventional tiny/vector parameters.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A4. Compact trajectory seam\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Introduce a CompactTrajectory or equivalent adapter layer behind materialize(family_name, layer_index).\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep model.py calling semantic family names; do not move coefficient-layout logic into the transformer forward path.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Concatenate separately materialized Q/K/V only at the nanoGPT c_attn compatibility boundary.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Implement only legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL through the new seam for equivalence.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Preserve current output tensor shapes.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 Deterministic legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL materialization matches the pre-refactor fixture. DENSE and compact forward/backward smoke tests pass.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b A5. Checkpoint and wrapper cleanup\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Write new compact metadata into checkpoints: geometry_preset, attention_geometry, mlp_geometry, basis_family, basis_version, orders, model dimensions, and head metadata.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Hard-fail resume on missing or mismatched compact metadata.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Update wrappers to support both preset invocation and explicit module-geometry invocation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep legacy SHEET_COL clearly labelled if it remains available for baseline comparison.\par
\pard\sb120\sa90\f0\fs24\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa130\f0\fs23 Save/resume works only within the new schema. Mismatch tests cover preset, resolved module geometries, basis fields, and orders.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b Recommended PR split\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A0: audit fixtures and baseline tests.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A1: config fields, preset expansion, explicit module-geometry overrides, and identity reporting.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A2: basis-kernel interface with CHEBY only.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A3: semantic family metadata and categorical head/qkv annotations.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A4: CompactTrajectory seam and legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL equivalence.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - PR A5: checkpoint metadata and wrapper cleanup.\par

\pard\sb220\sa140\f0\fs28\b Do not do in Stage A\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not implement DCT.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not implement MLP_BLOCK, HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK, or BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not implement SHEET_ROW, SHEET_FLAT, or generic all-matrix BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not compact LayerNorm or bias vectors.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not add old-checkpoint conversion code.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not optimize materialization before equivalence tests are stable.\par
}
