{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 Principled Compact Geometry Requirements Spec\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa320\f0\fs22 Clean-axis compacting, module-level geometry selectors, CURVE / MLP_BLOCK / BLOCK presets, CHEBY and DCT\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Purpose\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 This document replaces the earlier SHEET_ROW / SHEET_COL / SHEET_FLAT / generic BLOCK plan. That plan was too broad: it treated packed implementation axes as if they were meaningful smooth geometry. The revised rule is stricter and cleaner: compact only structural dimensions that are genuinely ordered; leave categorical packing dimensions explicit.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The primary user-facing geometry presets are CURVE, MLP_BLOCK, and BLOCK. HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK is an underlying attention geometry used by BLOCK and available for ablations, but it is not normally a primary preset on its own. Existing SHEET_COL remains a legacy empirical baseline because it is training well; it is not part of the new principled geometry set.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 This is a requirements spec, not an implementation patch. Old checkpoint compatibility is out of scope. DENSE behaviour must remain unchanged.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 1. Vocabulary and top-level decisions\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Model families and basis families\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - DENSE: conventional repeated transformer weights. DENSE is not a compact geometry and has no compact basis_family.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - CHEBY: current Chebyshev first-kind basis family, using the QR-stabilized finite sampled basis.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - DCT: real orthonormal DCT basis family, initially DCT-II, exposed to users simply as DCT.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Basis family and geometry are independent for compact models: CHEBY_CURVE, CHEBY_MLP_BLOCK, CHEBY_BLOCK, DCT_CURVE, DCT_MLP_BLOCK, and DCT_BLOCK are valid experiment identities.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Geometry presets versus module geometries\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 A geometry preset is a user-facing shorthand. It resolves to separate attention and MLP geometry selectors. This distinction is required because attention and MLP weights do not expose the same clean axes.\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 geometry_preset = curve | mlp_block | block\line attention_geometry = curve | head_aware_block\line mlp_geometry = curve | mlp_block\line basis_family = chebyshev | dct\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Preset expansion must be deterministic and recorded in manifests and checkpoints.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - CURVE resolves to attention_geometry=curve and mlp_geometry=curve.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - MLP_BLOCK resolves to attention_geometry=curve and mlp_geometry=mlp_block.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - BLOCK resolves to attention_geometry=head_aware_block and mlp_geometry=mlp_block.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Explicit invocation of attention_geometry and mlp_geometry must remain easy. Presets are the common path, but the module selectors are required for ablations, debugging, and isolating attention versus MLP contributions.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK alone may be invokable as attention_geometry=head_aware_block with mlp_geometry=curve, but it should not be treated as a main preset. MLP matrices dominate repeated transformer matrix parameters, so an attention-only block run is a secondary ablation, not a core candidate.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Legacy names and demoted geometries\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The old ambiguous SHEET name should not be used for new experiment identities. Current SHEET behaviour corresponds to legacy SHEET_COL. It may be retained as a baseline and refactor-equivalence target only.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 SHEET_ROW, SHEET_FLAT, and generic all-matrix BLOCK are not primary targets. They compact axes that are not clean for attention, especially axes crossing qkv or attention-head packing boundaries. They should not be implemented as part of the principled geometry plan unless separately justified later.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 2. Clean-axis rule\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Compact geometry must only be applied to axes that are meaningful ordered structural dimensions. A compact basis should not be run across a categorical packing boundary just because tensors happen to be laid out contiguously in memory.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Clean axes\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Transformer depth is clean: layers form an ordered repeated axis.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - MLP output channel and input channel are clean enough for the initial block experiment.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Attention head-local channel axes are clean inside a head.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Residual-stream input/output channel axes are acceptable where they do not cross categorical head partitions.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Categorical axes that must not be smoothed\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - qkv_role is categorical: Q, K, and V must be distinct semantic families, not adjacent coordinates in one compact axis.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention head index is categorical: no basis should be built over head number. Head order is a packing convention, not a smooth geometry.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Packed head boundaries must not be crossed by a compact basis in HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Parameter groups that remain conventional\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - LayerNorm weights and biases are real learned parameters but are tiny; leave them conventional or explicit per-layer vectors in the first pass.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Attention and MLP biases are tiny; leave them conventional in the first pass.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Token embeddings and lm_head are out of scope. They are large, but they are not repeated-by-depth transformer matrix families and need a separate experiment.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 3. Required geometry presets\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b CURVE\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 CURVE compacts transformer depth only. It applies to repeated attention and MLP matrix families. Matrix entries remain explicit over output row and input column. This is the cleanest compact baseline because it only assumes smoothness across layer depth.\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 W_l[o,i] = sum_p C[o,i,p] * B_depth[l,p]\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_geometry=curve\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_geometry=curve\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Primary use: clean depth-only compact baseline.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b MLP_BLOCK\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 MLP_BLOCK applies block geometry only to MLP matrices. It leaves attention matrices on CURVE. This isolates the effect of compacting the largest repeated matrix families over their clean 3D structure.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Applicable families:\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_expansion_weight: depth x output_channel x input_channel\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_contraction_weight: depth x output_channel x input_channel\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 W_l[o,i] = sum_pqr C[p,q,r] * B_depth[l,p] * B_row[o,q] * B_col[i,r]\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_geometry=curve\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_geometry=mlp_block\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Primary use: test the biggest clean compression opportunity. This should be a high-priority comparison against CURVE because MLP matrices dominate repeated transformer matrix parameters.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK is an attention-only module geometry. It treats qkv_role and head index as explicit categorical axes, while compacting clean axes inside each attention role/head block.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 For Q, K, and V, each role is a separate semantic family. Within each role, each head receives its own compact block over depth, head-local output channel, and full residual-stream input channel.\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 W_role,l,h[o,i] = sum_pqr C_role,h[p,q,r] * B_depth[l,p] * B_head_out[o,q] * B_in[i,r]\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 For attention_output_weight, each input head receives its own compact block over depth, full output channel, and head-local input channel.\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 W_o,l[o,h,i] = sum_pqr C_o,h[p,q,r] * B_depth[l,p] * B_out[o,q] * B_head_in[i,r]\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - There is no basis over h. The head index is explicit and categorical.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Q/K/V may still be concatenated into nanoGPT's fused c_attn tensor at the compatibility boundary, but compact parameters must remain role-specific and head-aware.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Primary use: part of the BLOCK preset and optional attention-only ablations.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b BLOCK preset\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 BLOCK is the full principled compact preset. It activates HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK for attention and MLP_BLOCK for MLP. It is not generic all-matrix 3D BLOCK; it is a preset combining the clean attention and MLP module geometries.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_geometry=head_aware_block\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_geometry=mlp_block\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Primary use: main full compact candidate.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The key comparison is MLP_BLOCK versus BLOCK. That isolates the added value of head-aware attention compaction while holding MLP treatment fixed.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 4. Semantic matrix families\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The compact system must operate on semantic transformer families, not merely on nanoGPT packing tensors.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Attention families\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_query_weight\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_key_weight\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_value_weight\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_output_weight\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Q, K, and V are distinct compact families by attention role. In CURVE, each role is a full [n_embd, n_embd] matrix family. In HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK, each role is further partitioned by head, but head is explicit rather than compacted.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b MLP families\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_expansion_weight\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_contraction_weight\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 These are the cleanest block targets and should be reported separately from attention compact parameters.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Reporting requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reports must show compact attention parameters, compact MLP parameters, conventional tiny/vector parameters, and total trainable parameters separately.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reports must include requested geometry_preset and resolved attention_geometry / mlp_geometry.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reports must include per-family coefficient shapes and axis orders.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reports must indicate whether a basis crosses any attention-head boundary. HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK must report that it does not.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 5. Orders and axis policy\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The term order is retained. It means the number of retained basis functions along a compact axis.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - depth_order applies to depth bases.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - mlp_row_order and mlp_col_order, or resolved row_order/col_order per MLP family, apply to MLP_BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - attention_head_out_order, attention_in_order, attention_out_order, and attention_head_in_order, or equivalent resolved per-family orders, apply to HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Order derivation must be explicit, deterministic, and included in manifests.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Rectangular matrices must derive row and column orders from the actual axis widths, not from a single overloaded order field.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The current base_row_order naming is too ambiguous for the new plan. It may remain temporarily as a backwards-compatible alias, but the resolved per-axis order names must be clear in code and reports.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 6. Basis kernel requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 CHEBY and DCT must be implemented through a basis-kernel interface. Geometry code must consume evaluated basis matrices by semantic axis name and should not know whether the source basis is CHEBY, DCT, or a future basis family.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Basis kernel responsibilities\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - basis_family name and basis_version string\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - coordinate policy for sampled axes\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - raw basis construction\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - optional stabilization or normalization policy\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - cache-key fields\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - basis metadata and manifest reporting\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - basis-specific numerical tests\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b CHEBY\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 CHEBY should preserve the current Chebyshev first-kind behaviour. The finite sampled Chebyshev basis should remain QR-stabilized so the actual basis columns used by training are numerically orthonormal on the sampled axis.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b DCT\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 DCT should initially mean orthonormal DCT-II. It should be exposed to users as DCT and recorded internally as basis_version=dct_ii_orthonormal_v1.\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 B[n,0] = sqrt(1 / N)\line B[n,k] = sqrt(2 / N) * cos(pi * (n + 0.5) * k / N), for k > 0\line Use columns k = 0 .. order-1\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 DCT-II should be orthonormal by construction under the discrete inner product. Do not QR DCT unless tests expose a real numerical issue.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 7. Checkpoint and compatibility requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Old compact checkpoints are not supported across this refactor. Missing compact metadata must hard-fail rather than silently reinterpret old parameters.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 New compact checkpoints must record at least:\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - model_family\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - geometry_preset\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - resolved attention_geometry and mlp_geometry\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - basis_family and basis_version\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - depth_order and all resolved per-axis orders\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - n_layer, n_embd, n_head, head_dim, bias setting, and other model dimensions needed to validate family shapes\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - semantic family list and coefficient shape metadata\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Resume must hard-fail on mismatched compact metadata, basis metadata, model dimensions, or axis orders. No silent reinterpretation and no conversion path for old SHEET checkpoints.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 8. Acceptance requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b General\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - DENSE smoke tests still run unchanged.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL materialization can be proven equivalent during Stage A refactor staging.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Preset expansion is deterministic, tested, and recorded.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Explicit attention_geometry and mlp_geometry overrides are tested and recorded.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Optimizer groups cover each trainable coefficient exactly once and exclude basis buffers.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Geometry-specific\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - CURVE has shape, materialization, parameter-count, save/resume, and smoke-training tests.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - MLP_BLOCK has shape, scalar materialization, parameter-count, save/resume, and smoke-training tests for mlp_expansion_weight and mlp_contraction_weight.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK tests verify Q/K/V role separation, explicit head partitioning, and no basis over head index.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - BLOCK preset tests verify it expands to head-aware attention plus MLP block and records both resolved geometries.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reports distinguish attention compact parameters, MLP compact parameters, conventional tiny/vector parameters, and DENSE control parameters.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Basis-specific\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - CHEBY basis-kernel output matches current QR-stabilized behaviour for fixed sample_count/order/dtype/device.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - DCT basis tests cover shape, Gram error, cache separation from CHEBY, dtype/device movement, and metadata reporting.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - CHEBY/DCT checkpoint mismatch tests hard-fail.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 9. Possible future work\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK-only runs as attention ablations if attention contribution needs isolated testing.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Legendre basis kernel as a second polynomial baseline that is less endpoint-focused than Chebyshev.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - B-spline basis kernel for local smooth structure if global bases are too restrictive.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Wavelet or Haar basis kernel for local or multiscale structure.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Learned or dictionary bases after fixed-basis comparisons are understood.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Embedding/lm_head compaction as a separate experiment.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reconsider legacy SHEET_COL only as an empirical baseline, not as a principled geometry.\par
}
