{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 Enhanced Resume and Fork Implementation Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa320\f0\fs22 Staged implementation of stable identity, resume, fork lineage, and LR phase control\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Status: Draft for review. No implementation shall begin until the requirements, review, implementation plan, and test plan are approved.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 1. Working rules\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Implement only on enhanced_resume_and_fork after explicit approval.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Preserve existing working fresh, resume, DENSE, compact, checkpoint, and instrumentation paths until replacement behaviour is proven.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not change model mathematics or compact coefficient layouts.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not implement compatibility or migration for checkpoints predating the enhanced lifecycle schema.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Do not copy, move, rename, or normalize checkpoints.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep lifecycle identity, resolution, manifests, and scheduler policy in Python rather than shell where possible.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Use snake_case and the THOG source-marking convention.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Every stage must pass focused tests and full CPU regression before the next stage.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 2. Target module boundaries\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Lifecycle identity and manifest\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Add small modules such as sheet/run_lifecycle.py and sheet/run_manifest.py to own logical IDs, session IDs, start labels, artifact_descriptor, artifact_name, parent/root lineage, fork generation, suffix construction, and atomic manifest IO.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Checkpoint resolution\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Add sheet/checkpoint_resolver.py to own selector classification, exact leading-timestamp matching, exact artifact_name matching, direct paths, ambiguity errors, and enhanced-schema validation.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Learning-rate schedules\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Extend the scheduler behind an explicit schedule or phase object. Resume restores the original schedule parameters and uses completed_updates as the schedule input; the LR is then calculated normally for every resumed step. restart_cosine fork creates and persists a child phase.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Telemetry continuity\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Extend telemetry construction to accept stored logical directories and W&B IDs. Keep W&B continuity best effort and training-state independent.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 3. Stage 0: lock requirements into tests\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Add failing tests for the public contract before modifying runtime code.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - -n help text is exactly total optimizer steps for the run, not additional steps.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Resume and fork require explicit -n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Omitted, smaller, and equal -n diagnostics match the specification and fail before trainer construction.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Resume calculates and reports the LR for the first resumed step from the restored schedule, without redefining the schedule endpoint from -n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - artifact_name and artifact_descriptor terminology and grammar are tested explicitly.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Old lifecycle schemas hard-fail.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: tests fail only because the new feature is not yet implemented; existing tests remain green.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 4. Stage 1: stable naming and lifecycle metadata\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Remove n_, w_, and k_ from future artifact_descriptor values while retaining batch, accumulation, model dimensions, geometry, basis, orders, residual identity, and original peak-LR summary.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Define artifact_name as <start_timestamp>_<artifact_descriptor>[__FORK_<generation>_FROM_<root_start_timestamp>].\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add logical_run_id, session_id, creation_mode, root_start_timestamp, fork_generation, immediate parent fields, and telemetry identity fields.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add atomic run manifest writing and recovery.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Bump lifecycle/checkpoint schema. Older schemas are rejected without conversion.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: fresh runs produce stable names and complete lifecycle metadata without changing training behaviour.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 5. Stage 2: selector resolver\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Resolve exact checkpoint files, artifact directories named by artifact_name, exact artifact_name values, and exact leading YYMMDD-HHMM timestamps.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Match timestamps only at the beginning of artifact_name. Ignore root timestamps embedded in fork suffixes.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Fail deterministically on zero or multiple matches.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Return a resolved checkpoint record without copying or renaming anything.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: all selector forms resolve the same enhanced-schema checkpoint and ambiguity tests pass.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 6. Stage 3: mode-aware parsing and mandatory total STEPS\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Extend -q to fresh, resume, and fork in both wrappers and Python.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add --resume-from and fork controls -0 through -3 plus long equivalents.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Apply fresh defaults only in fresh mode. Resume and fork option defaults must remain None until checkpoint inheritance and validation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Keep help text: -n STEPS total optimizer steps for the run (not additional steps).\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Require explicit -n in resume and fork before checkpoint state is loaded.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reject -n less than or equal to checkpoint completed_updates before model construction, GPU allocation, telemetry initialization, or output mutation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Print the required THOG2 INFO diagnostics exactly, with a separate accurate equal-value heading.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: a minimal resume command requires only mode, selector, total STEPS, and any explicit operational overrides.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 7. Stage 4: checkpoint-driven resume\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Load immutable model, optimizer, batch, seed, compact identity, schedule, and completed-update values from the checkpoint.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Treat explicitly supplied material values as equality assertions. Reject mismatches.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Apply only the approved operational override whitelist.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Restore optimizer, scaler, RNG, batch-source, trainer counters, non-finite counters, and schedule state.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Use supplied -n only as the new stopping target. Continue calculating LR from the original warmup and decay parameters using completed_updates; do not modify warmup_updates, decay_updates, phase boundaries, minimum LR, or current schedule parameters.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Before training, print completed steps, total steps, remaining steps, schedule identity, original decay endpoint, LR for the first resumed step, and post-decay behaviour.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: interrupted and uninterrupted tiny runs match in model, optimizer, data-stream, and LR sequence. Larger resume STEPS extends only the stop point and does not redefine the original decay endpoint.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 8. Stage 5: continuous files and instrumentation\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reuse the same checkpoint path and artifact_name for resume.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Append train.log with explicit session boundaries.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Reuse the same TensorBoard logical directory and lifetime optimizer step.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Persist and reuse W&B run ID when available; warn and continue safely when W&B continuity fails.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Write per-session result records while retaining a current aggregate result.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: a multi-session run appears as one logical run in local files and in supported telemetry, with no duplicate or reset step axis.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 9. Stage 6: fork identity and inheritance\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Create a new logical_run_id, leading timestamp, artifact_descriptor, artifact_name, checkpoint path, log, result root, TensorBoard directory, and W&B identity.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Construct artifact_name as <start_timestamp>_<descriptor_of_child>__FORK_<generation>_FROM_<root_start_timestamp>.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Increment generation from the parent while retaining the original root timestamp.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Record immediate parent, root ancestor, parent checkpoint, parent completed update, and full lineage before the first child update.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: first- and second-generation forks have truthful names, separate outputs, and complete lineage.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 10. Stage 7: restart_cosine fork schedule\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Add -3 restart_cosine with required -0, -1, -2, and -n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Derive phase_start_update from parent completed_updates and phase_start_lr from the parent schedule at that boundary.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Use total STEPS as phase_end_update.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Preserve optimizer moments.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Persist complete phase history and active phase index.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Resume a fork at the correct relative phase step without repeating rewarm.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Exit gate: analytic LR values, uninterrupted/fork-resume equivalence, and phase persistence tests pass.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 11. Stage 8: integration and release gate\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Run full CPU regression, shell syntax checks, wrapper dry-runs, focused DDP tests, and available GPU smoke tests.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Verify fresh, resume, fork, DENSE, and compact paths.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Audit every new or replaced nanoGPT-derived line for the THOG marking convention.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Update user-facing help and examples only after all behaviour is tested.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Final exit gate: every requirement in the approved specification maps to at least one passing named test, and no unsupported old-checkpoint behaviour is implied.\par
}