{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Georgia;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl900\margr900\margt900\margb900
\widowctrl\f0\fs22
\pard\qc\sa180\f0\fs44\b THOG2 Chebyshev Sheet\line Requirements Specification\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa220\f0\fs24\i v0.2 - integrated compact-depth, block, and semantic sheet geometry\i0\par
\pard\qc\sa320\f0\fs18 Draft requirements document - July 2026\line Target location: docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Requirements_Specification_v0.2.rtf\par
\pard\sa220\f0\fs22 This document consolidates the original THOG2 Chebyshev sheet requirements, the curve/sheet/block basis requirements, and the new semantic sheet requirements into one logical specification. It is organised as if the geometry ladder, clean-axis rule, block variants, and semantic sheet variants had been designed together.\par

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b Table of Contents\b0\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 1. Concept and architecture\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 2. Vocabulary, axes, and naming\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 3. Basis families and compact orders\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 4. Geometry base options\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 5. Geometry presets\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 6. Detailed geometry requirements\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 7. Configuration and identity requirements\par
\pard\li360\sa60\f0\fs22 8. Out of scope\par
\page

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 1. Concept and architecture\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 1.1 Core concept\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.1.1\b0  THOG2 shall treat a repeated transformer matrix family across depth as one structured learned object, not as an unrelated list of dense layer matrices.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.1.2\b0  The compact representation shall be learned directly during training. It shall not be defined as a post-training approximation to an already trained dense model.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.1.3\b0  Depth shall be treated as the primary compact axis for THOG2 weight geometry. Other compact axes shall be admitted only when their architectural meaning is explicit.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.1.4\b0  The architecture shall preserve the ordinary GPT/nanoGPT training boundary: token IDs remain categorical, the data pipeline and next-token objective remain conventional, and the transformer topology remains recognisable.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.1.5\b0  The compact parameterisation shall define the hypothesis class. Materialisation of dense-equivalent weights, where used, is an execution boundary and not the architectural source of truth.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 1.2 Transformer matrix families\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.2.1\b0  The specification shall apply to repeated transformer matrix families: attention input projection, attention output projection, MLP expansion, and MLP contraction.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.2.2\b0  The attention input projection may be stored in packed QKV form for compatibility, but the architecture shall understand Q, K, and V as semantic roles.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.2.3\b0  The semantic attention axes are qkv_role, head, local_head_channel, d_model_input, and d_model_output.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.2.4\b0  The semantic MLP axes are hidden_channel, d_model_input, and d_model_output.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.2.5\b0  A linear weight shall be understood in the operator convention W[out_features, in_features]. Rows produce output channels; columns are input channels read by the row.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 1.3 Clean-axis rule\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.3.1\b0  A compact basis may span only axes that are meaningful enough to support ordered or basis-like interpolation.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.3.2\b0  Depth is a clean ordered axis and is always eligible for compact representation.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.3.3\b0  The residual d_model axes may be treated as compressible basis-like axes for sheet and block experiments.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.3.4\b0  MLP hidden channels, attention heads, QKV role, and local head channels may be kept whole when the experiment is intended to preserve their semantic identity.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.3.5\b0  No compact basis shall smear across QKV role or attention head index unless a later specification explicitly approves that research direction.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 1.4 Whole axes and compressed axes\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.4.1\b0  A whole axis is an explicit discrete index in the coefficient tensor. No Chebyshev or DCT smoothing is applied across that axis.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.4.2\b0  A compressed axis is represented by a finite orthogonal basis order. The learned coefficients span that axis through the selected basis family.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.4.3\b0  Each geometry option shall be describable by listing its compressed axes and its whole axes.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.4.4\b0  For two-dimensional sheet geometries, depth is one compressed sheet axis and exactly one non-depth matrix axis is the other compressed sheet axis. Remaining matrix axes stay whole.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 1.4.5\b0  For three-dimensional block geometries, depth and two matrix axes are compressed together. This is more compact but more restrictive than a sheet geometry.\par

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 2. Vocabulary, axes, and naming\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 2.1 Axis vocabulary\b0\par
\pard\f1\fs17\sa120
Axis                Meaning                                                  Requirement note\line
------------------  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------------------------------------\line
depth              Layer index across the repeated transformer stack.        Usually compressed by P.\line
output_rows        Rows of W[out,in]; one row produces one output feature.   Whole in generic_sheet_col.\line
input_cols         Columns of W[out,in]; one column reads one input feature. Compressed in generic_sheet_col.\line
d_model_input      Residual-stream channel axis read by a projection.        Usually compressible.\line
d_model_output     Residual-stream channel axis produced by a projection.    Compressible in one attention-output option.\line
hidden_channel     MLP intermediate channel.                                 Whole in sheet_mlp.\line
qkv_role           Query, key, or value role.                                Always whole in semantic attention.\line
head               Attention head index.                                     Always whole in semantic attention.\line
local_head_channel Scalar channel inside one attention head.                 Whole or compressed depending on option.\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 2.2 Public naming rules\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 2.2.1\b0  The name legacy_sheet_col shall remain a compatibility alias for the original sheet-column behaviour.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 2.2.2\b0  The preferred public name for that behaviour shall be generic_sheet_col.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 2.2.3\b0  The name depth shall be the preferred public name for the depth-only geometry. The older name curve may remain as a compatibility alias where needed.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 2.2.4\b0  Preset names shall be flat, short, and descriptive. User-facing commands shall not require independent selection of MLP, QKV, and attention-output components unless an advanced override mode is deliberately added.\par

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 3. Basis families and compact orders\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 3.1 Basis family\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.1.1\b0  CHEBY shall mean the Chebyshev first-kind compact basis family used by THOG2.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.1.2\b0  CHEBY shall use the finite sampled, QR-stabilised basis convention unless a later version explicitly changes that convention.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.1.3\b0  DCT shall mean a real orthonormal DCT basis family. The initial DCT version shall correspond to DCT-II orthonormal basis columns.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.1.4\b0  Geometry requirements shall be independent of basis family. A geometry describes axes and coefficient layout; a basis family describes how compressed axes are evaluated.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.1.5\b0  The selected basis family and basis version shall be part of model identity.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 3.2 Compact orders\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.1\b0  P shall denote the retained depth order.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.2\b0  Q shall denote the retained generic row/column or d_model order when a single generic matrix-axis order is used.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.3\b0  J shall denote the retained per-head QKV/local-channel order where applicable.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.4\b0  O shall denote the retained attention-output local-channel order where applicable.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.5\b0  X shall denote the retained MLP d_model order where applicable.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.6\b0  Y shall denote the retained MLP hidden-channel order where applicable.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 3.2.7\b0  A geometry shall state which orders it consumes. Unused orders are configuration noise and shall not change the model identity for that geometry.\par

\page
\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 4. Geometry base options\b0\par
\pard\sa120\f0\fs22 This table lists the base options available to the resolver. Some are complete whole-model presets. Others are module-level components used to form presets in Section 5.\par
\pard\f1\fs16\sa160
#  Base option          Applies to              Brief description                              Compressed axes                                  Uncompressed axes\line
-- -------------------- ----------------------- ---------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------\line
1  dense                all families            Conventional dense transformer weights.        none                                             all matrix axes, all layers\line
2  depth                all families            Depth-only compact geometry; alias curve.      depth                                            output_rows, input_cols\line
3  generic_sheet_col    all families            Original sheet-column behaviour.               depth, input_cols                                output_rows\line
4  legacy_sheet_col     all families            Compatibility alias for generic_sheet_col.     depth, input_cols                                output_rows\line
5  generic_sheet_row    all families            Transposed generic sheet ablation.             depth, output_rows                               input_cols\line
6  mlp_block            MLP only                Existing MLP block geometry.                   depth, MLP output axis, MLP input axis           MLP family/direction\line
7  head_aware_block     attention only          Existing attention block; keeps role/head.     QKV: depth, local, d_model_in; out: depth, d_model_out, local   QKV: role, head; out: head\line
8  sheet_mlp            MLP only                Semantic MLP sheet.                            depth, d_model_input/output                      hidden_channel\line
9  sheet_qkv            QKV only                Semantic QKV sheet.                            depth, d_model_input                             qkv_role, head, local_head_channel\line
10 sheet_out_dmodel     attention output only   Output sheet gives Q to d_model output.        depth, d_model_output                            head, local_head_channel\line
11 sheet_out_local      attention output only   Output sheet gives Q to local channel.         depth, local_head_channel                        d_model_output, head\par

\page
\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 5. Geometry presets\b0\par
\pard\sa120\f0\fs22 Presets are flat user-facing names. They resolve to one MLP component, one QKV component, and one attention-output component. Existing presets remain available; new sheet presets are formed by composing the base options above.\par
\pard\sa100\f0\fs24\b Existing and generic presets\b0\par
\pard\f1\fs16\sa160
#  Preset              MLP component       QKV component          Attn-out component      Purpose\line
-- ------------------- ------------------- ---------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------\line
1  dense               dense               dense                  dense                   Conventional dense baseline.\line
2  depth               depth               depth                  depth                   Depth-only compact geometry; preferred curve name.\line
3  curve               depth               depth                  depth                   Compatibility alias for depth.\line
4  generic_sheet_col   generic_sheet_col   generic_sheet_col      generic_sheet_col       Preferred name for original sheet-column behaviour.\line
5  legacy_sheet_col    generic_sheet_col   generic_sheet_col      generic_sheet_col       Compatibility alias for generic_sheet_col.\line
6  generic_sheet_row   generic_sheet_row   generic_sheet_row      generic_sheet_row       Whole-model transposed generic sheet ablation.\line
7  mlp_block           mlp_block           depth                  depth                   Existing MLP block preset; attention depth-only.\line
8  head_aware_block    depth               head_aware_block       head_aware_block        Existing attention block preset; MLP depth-only.\line
9  full_block          mlp_block           head_aware_block       head_aware_block        Existing full block preset.\par
\pard\sa100\f0\fs24\b Semantic sheet presets\b0\par
\pard\f1\fs16\sa160
#  Preset                  MLP component       QKV component          Attn-out component      Purpose\line
-- ----------------------- ------------------- ---------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------\line
10 sheet_mlp               sheet_mlp           generic_sheet_col      generic_sheet_col       Semantic MLP only; attention generic.\line
11 sheet_qkv               generic_sheet_col   sheet_qkv              generic_sheet_col       Semantic QKV only.\line
12 sheet_out_dmodel        generic_sheet_col   generic_sheet_col      sheet_out_dmodel        Attention-output d_model option only.\line
13 sheet_out_local         generic_sheet_col   generic_sheet_col      sheet_out_local         Attention-output local-channel option only.\line
14 sheet_attn_dmodel       generic_sheet_col   sheet_qkv              sheet_out_dmodel        Semantic attention using d_model-output out sheet.\line
15 sheet_attn_local        generic_sheet_col   sheet_qkv              sheet_out_local         Semantic attention using local-channel out sheet.\line
16 sheet_mlp_qkv           sheet_mlp           sheet_qkv              generic_sheet_col       MLP plus semantic QKV; attention output generic.\line
17 sheet_mlp_out_dmodel    sheet_mlp           generic_sheet_col      sheet_out_dmodel        MLP plus output d_model option; QKV generic.\line
18 sheet_mlp_out_local     sheet_mlp           generic_sheet_col      sheet_out_local         MLP plus output local option; QKV generic.\line
19 sheet_full_dmodel       sheet_mlp           sheet_qkv              sheet_out_dmodel        Full semantic sheet, d_model-output version.\line
20 sheet_full_local        sheet_mlp           sheet_qkv              sheet_out_local         Full semantic sheet, local-channel version.\par

\page
\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 6. Detailed geometry requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 6.1 Dense and depth\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.1.1\b0  The dense preset shall retain ordinary independently stored layer weights and shall not consume compact basis orders.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.1.2\b0  The depth geometry shall represent W_l[o,i] as a function of layer depth while leaving output_rows and input_cols explicit.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 depth: W_l[o,i] = sum_p C[o,i,p] * B_depth[l,p]\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.1.3\b0  Depth shall be the primary compact baseline for comparing whether matrix-axis compression is useful beyond layerwise sharing.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 6.2 Generic sheets\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.2.1\b0  generic_sheet_col shall keep output_rows whole and compress depth with input_cols.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 generic_sheet_col: W_l[o,i] = sum_pq C[o,p,q] * B_depth[l,p] * B_in[i,q]\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.2.2\b0  generic_sheet_row shall keep input_cols whole and compress depth with output_rows.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 generic_sheet_row: W_l[o,i] = sum_pq C[i,p,q] * B_depth[l,p] * B_out[o,q]\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.2.3\b0  generic_sheet_row shall be treated as a geometry ablation, not as a replacement for semantic sheet design.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 6.3 Existing block geometries\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.1\b0  mlp_block shall apply only to MLP expansion and MLP contraction families.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.2\b0  mlp_block shall compress depth, MLP output axis, and MLP input axis together.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 mlp_block: W_l[o,i] = sum_pqr C[p,q,r] * B_depth[l,p] * B_out[o,q] * B_in[i,r]\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.3\b0  head_aware_block shall apply only to attention families.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.4\b0  head_aware_block shall keep qkv_role and head whole. It shall not construct a compact basis over head index.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.5\b0  For QKV, head_aware_block shall compress depth, local head output channel, and residual-stream input channel per role and per head.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.3.6\b0  For attention output, head_aware_block shall compress depth, residual-stream output channel, and local head input channel per input head.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 6.4 Semantic MLP sheet\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.4.1\b0  sheet_mlp shall apply only to MLP expansion and MLP contraction families.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.4.2\b0  For MLP expansion, sheet_mlp shall keep hidden_channel whole and compress depth with d_model_input.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 MLP up: whole = hidden_channel; compressed = depth, d_model_input\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.4.3\b0  For MLP contraction, sheet_mlp shall keep hidden_channel whole and compress depth with d_model_output.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 MLP down: whole = hidden_channel; compressed = depth, d_model_output\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.4.4\b0  The purpose of sheet_mlp is to test whether MLP hidden channels should remain discrete semantic units while residual d_model axes are compressed.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 6.5 Semantic attention sheet\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.5.1\b0  sheet_qkv shall keep qkv_role, head, and local_head_channel whole.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.5.2\b0  sheet_qkv shall compress depth with d_model_input.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 QKV: whole = qkv_role, head, local_head_channel; compressed = depth, d_model_input\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.5.3\b0  sheet_out_dmodel shall keep head and local_head_channel whole, and shall compress depth with d_model_output.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 attn_out_dmodel: whole = head, local_head_channel; compressed = depth, d_model_output\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.5.4\b0  sheet_out_local shall keep d_model_output and head whole, and shall compress depth with local_head_channel.\par
\pard\li360\f1\fs18\sa120 attn_out_local: whole = d_model_output, head; compressed = depth, local_head_channel\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 6.5.5\b0  The attention presets shall include both attention-output choices because the correct second sheet axis for attention output is not settled by the clean-axis rule alone.\par

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 7. Configuration and identity requirements\b0\par
\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 7.1 Resolved identity\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.1.1\b0  Each run shall have a requested preset and a resolved compact identity.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.1.2\b0  Resolved compact identity shall include model family, requested preset, MLP component, QKV component, attention-output component, basis family, basis version, model dimensions, and the compact orders consumed by that identity.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.1.3\b0  Aliases shall resolve deterministically. legacy_sheet_col shall resolve to generic_sheet_col. curve shall resolve to depth.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.1.4\b0  Run names and metadata shall be sufficient to distinguish all presets in Section 5.\par

\pard\sa120\sb180\f0\fs26\b 7.2 Component composition\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.2.1\b0  Internally, the resolver may use separate MLP, QKV, and attention-output component selectors.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.2.2\b0  The normal user-facing interface shall expose flat presets rather than requiring users to compose component selectors manually.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 7.2.3\b0  Advanced component overrides may exist for ablation work, but a preset must always expand to a complete, auditable component tuple.\par

\pard\sa180\sb260\f0\fs32\b 8. Out of scope\b0\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 8.1.1\b0  This specification does not define correctness tests, implementation staging, or performance targets.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 8.1.2\b0  This specification does not assess current experimental results.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 8.1.3\b0  This specification does not require compaction of token embeddings, positional embeddings, LayerNorm, LM head, or biases.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 8.1.4\b0  This specification does not spectralise the sequence-position axis or replace causal attention with a fixed spectral mixer.\par
\pard\sa80\f0\fs22\b 8.1.5\b0  Alternative bases beyond CHEBY and DCT, including learned bases, wavelets, and Legendre bases, remain future candidates.\par
}
