{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Liberation Serif;}{\f1 Liberation Sans;}{\f2 Liberation Mono;}}
{\colortbl;\red217\green234\blue247;\red245\green245\blue245;}
\paperw16840\paperh23820\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\titlepg
{\header\pard\qc\i\f0\fs18 THOG2 Chebyshev Sheet Implementation Plan v0.24\par}
{\footer\pard\qc\f0\fs18 Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}{\fldrslt 1}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}{\fldrslt 1}}\par}
{\headerf\pard\par}{\footerf\pard\par}
\widowctrl\f0\fs22
\pard\qc\b\fs44 THOG2 Chebyshev Sheet Implementation Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\b\fs30 v0.24\b0\par
\pard\qc\i\fs24 Minimal basis-registry shim, compact-geometry resolver, and semantic sheet staging\i0\par
\pard\sa240\par
\pard\sa220 This implementation plan corresponds to docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Requirements_Specification_v0.24.rtf. It keeps the work on the existing BLOCK_enhancements_group branch and does not create a new branch.\par
\pard\sa220 Repository path: docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Implementation_Plan_v0.24.rtf\par
\pard\sa220 Companion requirements path: docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Requirements_Specification_v0.24.rtf\par
\pard\sa220 Future test plan path: docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Test_Plan_v0.24.rtf\par
\pard\sa220 Date: 18 July 2026\par
\page
\pard\qc\b\fs32 Detailed table of contents\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa120 1 Operating principles\par
\pard\sa120 2 Stage 0.5 - minimal basis-registry shim\par
\pard\sa120 3 Stage 1 - compact-geometry resolver consolidation\par
\pard\sa120 4 Stage 2 - preservation of existing compact geometries\par
\pard\sa120 5 Stage 3 - generic sheet row\par
\pard\sa120 6 Stage 4 - semantic MLP sheet\par
\pard\sa120 7 Stage 5 - semantic QKV sheet\par
\pard\sa120 8 Stage 6 - semantic attention-output sheets\par
\pard\sa120 9 Stage 7 - preset catalogue and wrapper surface\par
\pard\sa120 10 Stage 8 - diagnostics and metadata\par
\pard\sa120 11 Release gates\par
\pard\sa120 12 Explicit deferrals\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 1 Operating principles\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.1 Work shall remain on BLOCK_enhancements_group unless a new branch is explicitly requested.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.2 Preserve dense, legacy_sheet_col, depth, mlp_block, head_aware_block, and full_block as working code paths throughout the staging.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.3 Do not delete existing nanoGPT or THOG2 lines when modifying source. Comment out obsolete lines where practical and use the THOG source-marking convention.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.4 Do not combine speculative Chebyshev-native GPT work with this sheet-geometry pass. This pass is about THOG2 compact-weight geometry.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.5 Prefer small mechanical seams before adding new geometry behaviour. The first seam is the basis-registry shim.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.6 Every stage shall add descriptive regression tests before or alongside behaviour changes.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.7 Existing numerical behaviour must remain stable unless a stage explicitly states a checkpoint-breaking or semantics-breaking boundary.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 2 Stage 0.5 - minimal basis-registry shim\b0\fs22\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.1 Goal\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa220 Centralise basis-family names, artifact tags, basis versions, and basis-matrix construction before extending sheet geometry. This is deliberately a shim, not a full polynomial-native basis framework.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.2 New abstraction\b0\fs22\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 @dataclass(frozen=True)\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 class BasisSpec:\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     name: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     artifact_tag: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     version: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     supports_native_products: bool\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     def basis_matrix(self, sample_count: int, order: int, *, device, dtype): ...\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.1 Add a registry resembling:\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 BASIS_REGISTRY = {\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     "chebyshev": ChebyshevBasisSpec(...),\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     "dct": DctBasisSpec(...),\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 }\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.2 Add helpers get_basis_spec(name), basis_family_names(), basis_artifact_tag(name), and basis_version(name) if they simplify call sites.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.3 Chebyshev shall keep the existing Chebyshev basis matrix semantics and version.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.4 DCT shall keep the existing DCT basis matrix semantics and version.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.5 DCT shall report supports_native_products=False.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.6 Chebyshev may report supports_native_products=True as future metadata, but no current sheet code may depend on it.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.3 Explicit non-work\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.1 Do not add product_tensor.\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.2 Do not add coefficient-space metric.\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.3 Do not add activation_order or projection_rule.\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.4 Do not make DCT pretend to be a polynomial-product basis.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.4 Required edits\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 2.4.1 Update sheet/basis.py or a sibling module so basis-family construction is registry-backed.\par
\pard\sa160 2.4.2 Replace scattered chebyshev-or-dct validation with registry-driven validation.\par
\pard\sa160 2.4.3 Replace hand-coded artifact tag logic such as CHEBY/DCT branching with basis_spec.artifact_tag.\par
\pard\sa160 2.4.4 Preserve all existing public CLI spellings: chebyshev and dct.\par
\pard\sa160 2.4.5 Preserve all existing artifact tag spellings: CHEBY and DCT.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.5 Stage 0.5 tests\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.1 Test that registry names include exactly the currently supported compact-weight basis families.\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.2 Test that Chebyshev basis matrices are unchanged relative to the previous builder.\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.3 Test that DCT basis matrices are unchanged relative to the previous builder.\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.4 Test that artifact tags are registry-driven.\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.5 Test that invalid basis families fail before model construction.\par
\pard\sa160 2.5.6 Test that DCT does not advertise native polynomial products.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 3 Stage 1 - compact-geometry resolver consolidation\b0\fs22\par
\pard\b\fs26 3.1 Goal\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa220 Replace the old two-slot geometry spine with a resolved MLP/QKV/attention-output component object. This must happen before adding semantic sheets, otherwise the new presets will become another set of one-off branches.\par
\pard\b\fs26 3.2 Resolver object\b0\fs22\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 @dataclass(frozen=True)\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 class ResolvedCompactGeometry:\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     requested_preset: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     canonical_preset: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     mlp_component: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     qkv_component: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     attn_out_component: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     basis_family: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     basis_version: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     basis_artifact_tag: str\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     consumed_orders: tuple[str, ...]\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80     coefficient_families: tuple[CoefficientFamily, ...]\par
\pard\b\fs26 3.3 Required behaviour\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.1 legacy_sheet_col resolves to generic_sheet_col.\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.2 curve resolves to depth where compatibility aliases still exist.\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.3 Existing presets resolve through the same catalogue as new presets.\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.4 Dense bypasses compact selector fields cleanly.\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.5 Checkpoint metadata stores requested_preset and canonical_preset.\par
\pard\sa160 3.3.6 Run diagnostics print the resolved component triple.\par
\pard\b\fs26 3.4 Stage 1 tests\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 3.4.1 Test every legacy and canonical preset resolves to the expected component triple.\par
\pard\sa160 3.4.2 Test aliases preserve expected artifact compatibility where required.\par
\pard\sa160 3.4.3 Test invalid component combinations fail before model construction.\par
\pard\sa160 3.4.4 Test dense remains a conventional control path.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 4 Stage 2 - preservation of existing compact geometries\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 4.1.1 Route legacy_sheet_col/generic_sheet_col, depth, mlp_block, head_aware_block, and full_block through the new basis shim and resolver.\par
\pard\sa160 4.1.2 Do not change their coefficient shapes, materialisation formulas, parameter counts, direct-factorised paths, or checkpoint identity unless a specific incompatibility is unavoidable and declared.\par
\pard\sa160 4.1.3 Keep the existing wrappers working with their current basis-family arguments.\par
\pard\sa160 4.1.4 Add parameter-report checks proving existing paths report the same dense-equivalent and persistent parameter counts as before.\par
\pard\sa160 4.1.5 Add direct value checks for representative layer/output/input entries after resolver routing.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 5 Stage 3 - generic_sheet_row\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 5.1.1 Add generic_sheet_row as the row-side counterpart to generic_sheet_col.\par
\pard\sa160 5.1.2 Coefficient shape shall be coeff[input_col, depth_order, output_order].\par
\pard\sa160 5.1.3 Materialisation shall implement W_l[o,i] = sum_pq coeff[i,p,q] * B_depth[l,p] * B_out[o,q].\par
\pard\sa160 5.1.4 generic_sheet_row may flatten semantic output structure because it is a generic geometry, not a semantic sheet.\par
\pard\sa160 5.1.5 Add direct materialisation and gradient tests for all repeated matrix families.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 6 Stage 4 - semantic MLP sheet\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.1 Add sheet_mlp for MLP expansion and contraction.\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.2 Keep hidden_channel whole.\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.3 Expansion coefficient shape shall be coeff[hidden_channel, P, X].\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.4 Contraction coefficient shape shall be coeff[hidden_channel, P, X].\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.5 The component consumes P and X. It shall not consume Y.\par
\pard\sa160 6.1.6 Test that gradients reach the expected hidden-channel-specific coefficient tensor and do not leak into a shared hidden basis.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 7 Stage 5 - semantic QKV sheet\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.1 Add sheet_qkv for the packed QKV input projection.\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.2 Treat qkv_role, head, and local_head_channel as whole axes.\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.3 Coefficient shape shall be coeff[qkv_role, head, local_head_channel, P, Q].\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.4 The component consumes P and Q. It shall not consume J.\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.5 Test that changing one role/head/local coefficient changes only the corresponding semantic slice.\par
\pard\sa160 7.1.6 Test materialise-then-linear and direct/factorised paths where both exist.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 8 Stage 6 - semantic attention-output sheets\b0\fs22\par
\pard\b\fs26 8.1 sheet_out_dmodel\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 8.1.1 Keep head and local_head_channel whole.\par
\pard\sa160 8.1.2 Compress depth and d_model_output.\par
\pard\sa160 8.1.3 Coefficient shape shall be coeff[head, local_head_channel, P, Q].\par
\pard\b\fs26 8.2 sheet_out_local\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 8.2.1 Keep d_model_output and head whole.\par
\pard\sa160 8.2.2 Compress depth and local_head_channel.\par
\pard\sa160 8.2.3 Coefficient shape shall be coeff[d_model_output, head, P, O].\par
\pard\b\fs26 8.3 Shared requirements\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 8.3.1 Neither attention-output alternative may be silently treated as the other.\par
\pard\sa160 8.3.2 Add direct value checks that distinguish d_model compression from local-channel compression.\par
\pard\sa160 8.3.3 Add parameter-report checks showing which attention-output axis is whole and which is compressed.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 9 Stage 7 - preset catalogue and wrapper surface\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 9.1.1 Add user-facing presets: generic_sheet_row, sheet_mlp, sheet_qkv, sheet_attn_dmodel, sheet_attn_local, sheet_full_dmodel, and sheet_full_local.\par
\pard\sa160 9.1.2 Preserve existing user-facing presets: legacy_sheet_col, generic_sheet_col, depth, mlp_block, head_aware_block, and full_block.\par
\pard\sa160 9.1.3 Keep wrapper basis selection using existing -B semantics, but validate through the registry.\par
\pard\sa160 9.1.4 Avoid adding new basis-specific wrapper branches. The wrapper should not need to know whether the registry has two or ten basis families.\par
\pard\sa160 9.1.5 Add dry-run tests proving each preset expands to the expected resolved component triple and artifact identity.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 10 Stage 8 - diagnostics and metadata\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 10.1.1 Parameter reports shall include per-family coefficient shape, dense-equivalent shape, component name, compressed axes, whole axes, basis family, basis version, and basis artifact tag.\par
\pard\sa160 10.1.2 Console startup shall print requested preset, canonical preset, component triple, basis family, basis version, and consumed orders.\par
\pard\sa160 10.1.3 Checkpoint metadata shall store the same resolver output required to reconstruct the compact geometry.\par
\pard\sa160 10.1.4 Changing compact geometry, basis family, basis version, basis artifact tag, or consumed order shall remain a material model change.\par
\pard\sa160 10.1.5 Existing depth-curve diagnostics may remain unchanged unless a geometry-specific diagnostic is cheap and useful.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 11 Release gates\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.1 Python source compilation passes.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.2 Both canonical wrappers pass bash syntax checks.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.3 Basis-registry tests pass.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.4 Resolver tests pass.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.5 Existing geometry regression tests pass unchanged or with explicitly justified expectation updates.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.6 New semantic sheet direct-value, shape, parameter-report, and gradient tests pass.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.7 Tiny CPU training smoke passes for at least dense, generic_sheet_col, depth, and one semantic-sheet full preset.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.8 The full CPU regression suite passes.\par
\pard\sa160 11.1.9 GPU smoke is run where available and reported honestly if unavailable.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 12 Explicit deferrals\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 12.1.1 Do not implement a Chebyshev-native residual-stream model in this pass.\par
\pard\sa160 12.1.2 Do not implement coefficient-space nonlinearities, product tensors, polynomial activation rules, or spectral LM heads in this pass.\par
\pard\sa160 12.1.3 Do not replace SDPA or ordinary dense activations in the current THOG2 model.\par
\pard\sa160 12.1.4 Do not add broad plugin-style architecture around bases before the actual polynomial-native requirements exist.\par
\pard\sa160 12.1.5 Do not create new branches for documentation or implementation unless explicitly requested.\par
\pard\sa220\i End of implementation plan.\i0\par
}