{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 Enhanced Resume and Fork Test Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa320\f0\fs22 Regression-heavy verification for stable identity, resume, fork lineage, telemetry continuity, and phase-aware LR schedules\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Status: Draft for review. Tests are specified but not implemented in this branch.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 1. Test principles\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Test public lifecycle semantics before private implementation details.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Use descriptive names that state the requirement and failure condition.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Prefer deterministic tiny CPU fixtures for state, schedule, and lineage equivalence.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Treat ambiguity, silent fallback, hidden file movement, schedule-endpoint redefinition, and silent material mutation as failures.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Fake W&B and TensorBoard; do not require network access.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Use temporary real filesystem trees for selector, manifest, log, and result tests.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Run wrapper dry-runs and shell syntax tests for scruffy and dreedle.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Retain full DENSE and compact-geometry regression.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 2. Core fixtures\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Enhanced-schema fresh DENSE and full_block checkpoints.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Checkpoints before warmup end, mid-cosine, at decay endpoint, and after decay endpoint.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - First- and second-generation fork artifact_name values.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Checkpoints mid-rewarm and mid-child-cosine.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - Fake W&B metadata with unique, missing, and conflicting IDs.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - An older checkpoint schema used only to verify hard failure.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 3. Wrapper and CLI tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_help_describes_n_as_total_optimizer_steps_for_the_run_not_additional_steps.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_wrapper_accepts_fresh_resume_and_fork_modes.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_requires_resume_from_and_explicit_n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fork_requires_resume_from_and_explicit_n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fresh_rejects_resume_from_and_fork_only_options.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_numeric_fork_options_zero_through_three_match_long_options.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_and_fork_preserve_omitted_values_as_none_instead_of_applying_fresh_defaults.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_scruffy_and_dreedle_wrapper_help_and_shell_syntax.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_user_facing_documents_do_not_use_redundant_exact_resume_term.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 4. Mandatory total-STEPS validation tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_without_n_prints_required_info_and_exits_before_checkpoint_load.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fork_without_n_prints_required_info_and_exits_before_checkpoint_load.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_n_less_than_completed_prints_required_total_steps_explanation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_n_equal_to_completed_prints_accurate_equal_value_heading_and_same_explanation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fork_n_less_than_or_equal_to_parent_completion_fails_before_child_artifact_creation.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_checkpoint_at_6000_with_n_10000_executes_exactly_4000_more_updates.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_checkpoint_at_10000_with_n_50000_executes_exactly_40000_more_updates.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_invalid_n_does_not_allocate_gpu_initialize_telemetry_append_logs_or_write_checkpoint.\par
\pard\sa120\sb170\f0\fs24\b Exact diagnostic assertions\b0\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 THOG2 INFO: -n was omitted during resume!\line You must specify a value for n, which must be greater than the number of steps already completed\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 THOG2 INFO: -n is less than the number of steps already completed!\line For clarity, n is taken to be the total of all steps, not an additional amount of steps. It must therefore be greater than the number of steps completed to date\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 5. Artifact naming and terminology tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_future_artifact_descriptor_excludes_n_w_and_k.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_artifact_descriptor_retains_batch_accumulation_model_geometry_basis_orders_residual_identity_and_original_peak_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_artifact_name_is_timestamp_descriptor_and_optional_single_fork_suffix.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_checkpoint_path_placeholders_and_runtime_paths_use_artifact_name_not_artifact_descriptor.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_changing_only_total_steps_warmup_or_checkpoint_interval_does_not_change_artifact_descriptor.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_changing_batch_size_or_model_descriptive_field_changes_artifact_descriptor.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_reuses_original_artifact_name_and_path.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_lineage_examples_use_descriptor_of_parent_child_and_grandchild.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 6. Checkpoint resolver tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_checkpoint_file_directory_artifact_name_and_leading_timestamp_selectors_resolve_same_checkpoint.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_timestamp_selector_matches_only_leading_timestamp.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_root_timestamp_inside_fork_suffix_is_not_a_selector_match.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_zero_matches_fail_with_deterministic_diagnostic.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_multiple_matches_fail_without_latest_or_first_fallback.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resolver_never_copies_renames_or_normalizes_checkpoint.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_checkpoint_without_enhanced_lifecycle_schema_hard_fails.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 7. Resume configuration tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_minimal_resume_reconstructs_model_optimizer_batch_orders_seeds_and_schedule_from_checkpoint.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_equal_explicit_material_values_are_accepted_as_assertions.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_each_material_mismatch_fails_before_trainer_construction.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_each_approved_operational_override_is_applied.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_unapproved_override_is_rejected.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_requires_checkpoint_world_size_until_safe_change_is_separately_approved.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 8. Resume state equivalence tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_interrupted_and_uninterrupted_runs_match_model_optimizer_scaler_rng_batch_source_and_counters.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_nonfinite_skip_counters_resume_exactly.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_completed_updates_and_consumed_tokens_remain_lifetime_totals.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_session_completed_updates_and_session_consumed_tokens_start_at_zero_after_resume.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resumed_console_and_final_tok_per_second_use_session_tokens.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 9. Resume LR calculation tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_before_warmup_end_calculates_same_first_resumed_step_lr_as_uninterrupted_run.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_mid_cosine_calculates_same_first_resumed_step_lr_as_uninterrupted_run.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_at_decay_endpoint_calculates_original_minimum_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_each_resumed_step_uses_completed_updates_as_input_to_restored_original_schedule.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_larger_total_steps_does_not_change_warmup_decay_endpoint_minimum_lr_or_first_resumed_step_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_extension_past_original_decay_endpoint_holds_original_minimum_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_startup_console_prints_completed_total_remaining_schedule_decay_end_first_resumed_step_lr_and_post_decay_rule.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_startup_console_does_not_print_redundant_restored_position.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_user_does_not_supply_schedule_input_and_checkpoint_completed_updates_is_authoritative.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_schedule_parameters_are_immutable_while_lr_value_continues_to_evolve_under_restored_schedule.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_larger_n_does_not_rebuild_cosine_with_n_as_new_decay_endpoint.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 10. Log, result, and instrumentation continuity tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_appends_same_train_log_with_session_boundary.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_reuses_same_tensorboard_logical_directory_and_lifetime_step_axis.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_reuses_stored_wandb_id_when_available.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_missing_or_failed_wandb_continuity_warns_without_changing_training_state.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_each_session_gets_distinct_result_record_and_aggregate_result_is_updated.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_telemetry_metrics_continue_at_lifetime_optimizer_update.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 11. Fork identity and lineage tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_first_fork_uses_generation_one_and_root_timestamp.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fork_of_fork_uses_generation_two_and_same_root_timestamp.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_child_suffix_replaces_rather_than_appends_parent_suffix.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_child_artifact_name_contains_descriptor_of_child_not_parent_placeholder.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_fork_creates_new_logical_id_artifact_name_checkpoint_log_results_tensorboard_and_wandb_identity.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_child_records_immediate_parent_root_parent_checkpoint_parent_step_and_full_lineage_before_first_update.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_noop_continue_fork_fails_in_initial_implementation.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 12. restart_cosine schedule tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_restart_cosine_requires_mode_peak_min_rewarm_and_total_steps.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_continue_rejects_peak_min_and_rewarm_controls.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_phase_start_update_equals_parent_completed_updates.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_phase_start_lr_equals_parent_schedule_lr_at_boundary.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_phase_end_update_equals_total_steps_n.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_nonzero_rewarm_starts_at_parent_lr_and_reaches_requested_peak.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_zero_rewarm_two_update_phase_uses_peak_on_first_child_update.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_final_child_update_uses_requested_minimum_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_optimizer_moments_are_preserved_across_fork.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_phase_history_and_active_index_are_checkpointed.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_mid_rewarm_matches_uninterrupted_child_lr_sequence.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_resume_mid_child_cosine_matches_uninterrupted_child_lr_sequence.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 13. DDP and GPU tests\b0\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_ddp_ranks_resolve_identical_checkpoint_and_lifecycle_identity.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_ddp_primary_rank_only_mutates_manifests_logs_and_telemetry.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_ddp_resume_calculates_identical_first_resumed_step_lr_on_all_ranks.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_ddp_fork_creates_identical_child_phase_on_all_ranks.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_gpu_resume_smoke_uses_checkpoint_device_dtype_and_same_first_resumed_step_lr.\par
\pard\sa100\li360\fi-240\f0\fs23 - test_gpu_fork_restart_cosine_smoke_preserves_optimizer_moments.\par

\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b 14. Regression commands and exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 python -m unittest tests.test_enhanced_resume_cli\line python -m unittest tests.test_checkpoint_resolver\line python -m unittest tests.test_resume_schedule_calculation\line python -m unittest tests.test_resume_identity_and_throughput\line python -m unittest tests.test_fork_lineage\line python -m unittest tests.test_fork_lr_schedule\line python -m unittest discover tests\line bash -n current_dreedle_train_OWT.sh current_scruffy_train_OWT.sh\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 The feature is complete only when every requirement maps to a named passing test, the full CPU suite passes, wrapper syntax and dry-runs pass, focused DDP tests pass, available GPU smoke tests pass, and no test implies support for older checkpoint schemas.\par
}