{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 BLOCK Enhancements Group Implementation Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa300\f0\fs22 CURVE, SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, BLOCK, CHEBY, and DCT\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b Purpose\b0\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 This document turns the BLOCK enhancements requirements spec into an implementation plan. It keeps the same three chunks: abstraction refactor, compact geometry implementation, and DCT basis support.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The plan assumes development happens on branch BLOCK_enhancements_group. It intentionally does not preserve old checkpoint compatibility.\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 The implementation should preserve existing DENSE behaviour and the current matrix behaviour of SHEET_COL long enough to prove equivalence, then expose the new names and geometry choices clearly.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b 1. Abstraction refactor\b0\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Implementation goals\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Introduce explicit compact_geometry values: curve, sheet_row, sheet_col, sheet_flat, block.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Introduce explicit basis_family values: chebyshev first, dct later.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Separate basis construction, axis geometry, tensor-family metadata, and materialization layout.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Treat compact geometry as a maximum dimensionality cap, not as a request to invent axes.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep tiny vector families conventional in the first pass.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Primary files to inspect and likely modify\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - sheet/basis.py: split raw basis construction from stabilization/cache ownership.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - sheet/geometry.py: replace SHEET-specific FamilyGeometry assumptions with axis-aware family specs.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - sheet/trajectory.py: replace or wrap SheetTrajectory behind geometry-specific materialization adapters.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - sheet/model.py: keep model calls semantic; do not let model.py know coefficient layout details.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - runner/config/wrapper files: expose model_family, compact_geometry, and basis_family cleanly.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - tests under tests/: add geometry, basis, materialization, checkpoint metadata, and smoke-training tests.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A1: introduce constants and enums\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Add compact geometry constants: CURVE, SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Add basis family constants: CHEBYSHEV, DCT. Initially only CHEBYSHEV is implemented.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Add validation helpers that reject unknown geometry/basis combinations early.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep DENSE outside compact geometry. DENSE has no basis_family and no compact_geometry.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A2: introduce axis and family specs\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Define an axis spec with name, sample_count, order, optional base_order, and derived-order rule.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Define a tensor family spec with semantic family name, dense shape, intrinsic axes, and compactable axes.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Use intrinsic axes to implement the geometry cap rule. A family can only compact axes it actually has.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Classify repeated transformer matrix families as depth + output_row + input_col.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Classify layernorm/bias vectors as depth + feature if represented per layer, but mark them conventional for first pass.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A3: introduce basis kernels and preserve CHEBY behaviour\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Create a basis-kernel interface or registry keyed by basis_family and basis_version.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Each basis kernel owns coordinate policy, raw basis construction, optional stabilization/normalization, cache-key fields, metadata reporting, and basis-specific tests.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Move current Chebyshev recurrence into a Chebyshev basis kernel.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep current QR-stabilized Chebyshev behaviour under basis_family=chebyshev.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Ensure BasisCache keys include basis_family and basis_version, not only version text.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep basis buffers non-persistent.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Geometry and trajectory code should consume evaluated basis matrices by semantic axis name, without knowing whether they came from CHEBY, DCT, or a later basis.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A4: introduce a compact trajectory interface\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Expose one materialize(family_name, layer_index) path for matrix families.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep vector/tiny families conventional in first pass; do not compact layernorm or biases.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Use geometry-specific coefficient-layout adapters rather than branching through model.py.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Implement only CHEBY_SHEET_COL at first and prove it matches current materialization.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A5: checkpoint metadata reset\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Do not load old checkpoints that lack the new compact metadata block.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Write compact metadata into new checkpoints: model_family, compact_geometry, basis_family, basis_version, depth_order, row_order, col_order, flat_order, n_layer, n_embd, n_head, bias.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - On resume, hard-fail if any metadata differs.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Do not add conversion code for old SHEET checkpoints.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step A6: wrapper and naming surface\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep DENSE run naming unchanged except where existing naming already changed.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Rename new compact run identities using tokens such as CHEBY_CURVE, CHEBY_SHEET_COL, CHEBY_BLOCK, DCT_SHEET_ROW.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Avoid the old ambiguous SHEET token for new experiments.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Preserve current wrappers until the new wrapper path is proven, but do not expand stale wrapper names.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Acceptance gate for chunk 1\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DENSE smoke test still runs.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - CHEBY_SHEET_COL parameter counts and materialized matrix values match the pre-refactor path for fixed seeds.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Basis cache tests pass for shape, dtype, device, non-persistence, and orthonormality error.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Checkpoint resume works within new metadata schema and hard-fails on compact_geometry or basis_family mismatch.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - No model.py coefficient-layout logic leaks into the transformer forward path.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b 2. SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, and BLOCK\b0\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Implementation goals\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Implement all matrix compact geometries for repeated transformer matrix families.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Leave tiny vector families conventional in first pass.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep geometry-specific coefficient shapes explicit and testable.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Re-derive initialization for each geometry rather than reusing SHEET_COL scaling blindly.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Matrix family scope\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - attention_query_weight: output_rows = n_embd, input_cols = n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - attention_key_weight: output_rows = n_embd, input_cols = n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - attention_value_weight: output_rows = n_embd, input_cols = n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - attention_output_weight: output_rows = n_embd, input_cols = n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - mlp_expansion_weight: output_rows = 4 * n_embd, input_cols = n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - mlp_contraction_weight: output_rows = n_embd, input_cols = 4 * n_embd.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Q/K/V are distinct compact families by attention role only. In the initial version, each Q, K, and V family is still one full [n_embd, n_embd] matrix family and is not split by head. The execution path may concatenate them for nanoGPT c_attn compatibility.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Do not compact token embeddings or lm_head in this group unless a later explicit experiment targets them.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Out-of-scope head-aware variant: BLOCK_HEAD_SPLIT\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Q/K/V would further split each role-specific family by attention head, producing n_head compact blocks per role.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - attention_output_weight would split input columns by attention head.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - MLP matrix families would remain ordinary BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - The rationale is to avoid smoothing across artificial head boundaries.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - It is out of scope for initial BLOCK because it changes family count, order policy, parameter accounting, and inductive bias.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B1: coefficient layouts\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - CURVE coefficients: C[output_row, input_col, depth_order].\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - SHEET_COL coefficients: C[output_row, depth_order, col_order].\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - SHEET_ROW coefficients: C[input_col, depth_order, row_order].\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - SHEET_FLAT coefficients: C[depth_order, flat_order].\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - BLOCK coefficients: C[depth_order, row_order, col_order].\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Store and report coefficient shapes by semantic axis name, not by positional tuple alone.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B2: materialization formulas\b0\par
\pard\li360\sa180\f1\fs20 CURVE:      W[o,i] = sum_p   C[o,i,p]   * D[l,p]\line SHEET_COL:  W[o,i] = sum_pq  C[o,p,q]   * D[l,p] * Col[i,q]\line SHEET_ROW:  W[o,i] = sum_pq  C[i,p,q]   * D[l,p] * Row[o,q]\line SHEET_FLAT: W[o,i] = sum_pq  C[p,q]     * D[l,p] * Flat[o * input_cols + i,q]\line BLOCK:      W[o,i] = sum_pqr C[p,q,r]   * D[l,p] * Row[o,q] * Col[i,r]\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Start with straightforward einsum or equivalent matmul chains.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Only optimize after tests and memory telemetry are stable.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B3: axis order policy\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep depth_order as now.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Introduce row_order/base_row_order for output-row axes.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Introduce col_order/base_col_order for input-column axes.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Introduce flat_order/base_flat_order for flattened matrix axes.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - For rectangular matrices, derive row and column orders independently from their own axis widths.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Record derived family orders in parameter reports and run manifests.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B4: initialization\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - For each geometry, compute coefficient std so materialized W has the intended target std.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Assume orthonormal bases where applicable; verify empirically with sampled materialized std tests.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Run initialization tests over square and rectangular matrix families.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep residual-init depth scaling separate from coefficient initialization; do not mix the concepts.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B5: integration with model forward\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - The model should still request semantic tensors such as attention_query_weight and mlp_contraction_weight.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - The trajectory/materializer decides whether that request is CURVE, SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, or BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Do not create geometry-specific transformer block classes unless profiling proves it is necessary.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B6: tests\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Shape tests for every geometry and every matrix family.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Scalar equality tests comparing materialize output to direct basis summation for random sampled coordinates.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Parameter-count tests for each geometry and family.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Optimizer coverage tests: every trainable compact coefficient exactly once; no basis buffers in optimizer.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Device/dtype tests for CPU, CUDA if available, float32, float16/bfloat16 where supported.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - One tiny train step for each geometry.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - One save/resume test for each geometry under the new metadata schema.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step B7: staged landing order\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Land CURVE first if the abstraction is clean; it is simplest and catches metadata/naming issues.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Land SHEET_COL next and prove equivalence to current implementation.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Land SHEET_ROW and SHEET_FLAT next; they are natural two-axis comparisons.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Land BLOCK last; it is the first true three-axis case and has the highest memory/materialization risk.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Do not add DCT until CHEBY geometry tests are stable.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Acceptance gate for chunk 2\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - CHEBY_CURVE, CHEBY_SHEET_COL, CHEBY_SHEET_ROW, CHEBY_SHEET_FLAT, and CHEBY_BLOCK all run at least one CPU smoke train step.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - CUDA smoke tests pass where available.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Parameter reports distinguish compact matrix parameters from conventional tiny/vector parameters.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Run naming and artifact naming contain CHEBY plus the exact geometry token.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - No old ambiguous SHEET experiment identity is generated by new wrappers.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b 3. DCT\b0\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Implementation goals\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Add DCT as a basis_family option for all compact geometries after the CHEBY geometry work is stable.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Expose user-facing DCT, not DCT2.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Record internal basis_version as dct_ii_orthonormal_v1.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep DENSE unaffected.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Implement DCT as a basis kernel through the same interface used by CHEBY.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step C1: implement DCT-II basis kernel\b0\par
\pard\li360\sa180\f1\fs20 B[n,0] = sqrt(1 / N)\line B[n,k] = sqrt(2 / N) * cos(pi * (n + 0.5) * k / N), for k > 0\line Use k = 0 .. order - 1\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Use sample index n = 0 .. N - 1 directly, not normalized Chebyshev coordinates.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DCT-II should be orthonormal by construction; do not QR it unless tests prove a numerical issue.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep dtype/device casting and cache ownership consistent with the Chebyshev path.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep all DCT-specific coordinate and normalization choices inside the DCT basis kernel.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step C2: basis dispatch\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - basis_family=chebyshev uses the Chebyshev kernel with current Chebyshev + QR behaviour.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - basis_family=dct uses the DCT-II orthonormal kernel.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - BasisCache keys must include basis_family, basis_version, sample_count, order, dtype, and device.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - basis_sha256 and manifest reporting should include basis_family and basis_version.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Adding a future basis should require a new basis kernel plus tests, not edits throughout geometry/materialization code.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step C3: config, wrappers, and naming\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Expose basis_family through Python args and shell wrappers.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Generate run identities such as DCT_CURVE, DCT_SHEET_COL, and DCT_BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Reject basis_family for DENSE.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Hard-fail resume when checkpoint basis_family or basis_version differs.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step C4: tests\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DCT basis shape and Gram-error tests for multiple sample counts and orders.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DCT cache-key separation tests: DCT and CHEBY with same sample_count/order must not share cache entries.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DCT materialization tests for CURVE, SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, and BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - DCT save/resume and mismatch tests.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Paired tiny train smoke tests: CHEBY_* vs DCT_* for at least CURVE and SHEET_COL before scaling up.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Step C5: experimental rollout\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - First compare CHEBY_CURVE vs DCT_CURVE.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Then compare CHEBY_SHEET_COL vs DCT_SHEET_COL, CHEBY_SHEET_ROW vs DCT_SHEET_ROW, and CHEBY_SHEET_FLAT vs DCT_SHEET_FLAT.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Only after BLOCK correctness and memory are stable, compare CHEBY_BLOCK vs DCT_BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Keep DENSE as the conventional control in all result tables.\par
\pard\sb160\sa120\f0\fs24\b Acceptance gate for chunk 3\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - All basis tests pass for CHEBY and DCT.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - All compact geometries can run with basis_family=dct.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Artifacts and manifests identify DCT unambiguously.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Resume refuses CHEBY/DCT mismatch.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - At least one paired CHEBY/DCT smoke experiment has matching non-basis settings and usable instrumentation output.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b Possible future work\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - BLOCK_HEAD_SPLIT as an attention-only follow-up if ordinary BLOCK is hurt by artificial head-boundary smoothing.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Legendre basis kernel as a second polynomial baseline that is less endpoint-focused than Chebyshev.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - B-spline basis kernel for local smooth structure if global bases are too restrictive.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Wavelet or Haar basis kernel for local/multiscale structure, probably later rather than first.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Learned or dictionary bases after fixed-basis comparisons are understood.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - Low-rank or factorized baselines as comparisons, not as replacements for fixed geometric bases.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b Suggested PR sequence\b0\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR A1: basis-kernel/geometry metadata refactor; CHEBY_SHEET_COL equivalence only.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR A2: wrapper/config/naming cleanup for compact_geometry and basis_family; no new geometry yet.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR B1: CHEBY_CURVE.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR B2: CHEBY_SHEET_ROW and CHEBY_SHEET_FLAT, while keeping CHEBY_SHEET_COL stable.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR B3: CHEBY_BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR C1: DCT basis kernel implementation and tests.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR C2: DCT enabled across CURVE, SHEET_ROW, SHEET_COL, SHEET_FLAT, and BLOCK.\par
\pard\li360\fi-240\sa100\f0\fs23 - PR C3: experiment wrappers for paired CHEBY/DCT runs.\par
\pard\sb260\sa180\f0\fs29\b Near-term commands after pulling branch\b0\par
\pard\li360\sa180\f1\fs20 cd ~/git/thog2\line git fetch origin\line git switch BLOCK_enhancements_group\par
\pard\sa150\f0\fs23 Then inspect the two planning documents in docs/.\par
}