{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Liberation Serif;}{\f1 Liberation Sans;}{\f2 Liberation Mono;}}
{\colortbl;\red217\green234\blue247;\red245\green245\blue245;}
\paperw16840\paperh23820\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134\titlepg
{\header\pard\qc\i\f0\fs18 THOG2 Chebyshev Sheet Test Plan v0.24\par}
{\footer\pard\qc\f0\fs18 Page {\field{\*\fldinst PAGE}{\fldrslt 1}} of {\field{\*\fldinst NUMPAGES}{\fldrslt 1}}\par}
{\headerf\pard\par}{\footerf\pard\par}
\widowctrl\f0\fs22
\pard\qc\b\fs44 THOG2 Chebyshev Sheet Test Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\b\fs30 v0.24\b0\par
\pard\qc\i\fs24 Stage-gated tests for the sheet enhancement group\i0\par
\pard\sa240\par
\pard\sa220 This test plan corresponds to docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Requirements_Specification_v0.24.rtf and docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Implementation_Plan_v0.24.rtf. It is cumulative: each implementation stage shall add its test section before code for that stage is written.\par
\pard\sa220 Repository path: docs/THOG2_Chebyshev_Sheet_Test_Plan_v0.24.rtf\par
\pard\sa220 Branch: SHEET_enhancements_group\par
\pard\sa220 Date: 18 July 2026\par
\page
\pard\qc\b\fs32 Detailed table of contents\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa120 1 Test-plan rules\par
\pard\sa120 2 Stage 0.5 - minimal basis-registry shim\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 1 Test-plan rules\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.1 Each implementation stage shall have a named test-plan section committed before the corresponding code changes.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.2 New tests shall have descriptive names that state the contract being protected.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.3 Stage tests shall prefer deterministic CPU tests unless GPU behaviour is the actual contract under test.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.4 Compatibility tests shall verify preservation of existing dense, Chebyshev, and DCT code paths before any new geometry is added.\par
\pard\sa160 1.1.5 A passing test shall not depend on network access, W&B availability, or a local OpenWebText dataset.\par
\page
\pard\b\fs30 2 Stage 0.5 - minimal basis-registry shim\b0\fs22\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.1 Purpose\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa220 Stage 0.5 introduces a narrow public basis registry without changing numerical basis construction. The registry shall centralise accepted basis family names, user-facing artifact tags, basis versions, and support flags. It shall not introduce Chebyshev-native product tensors, metrics, activation-order rules, or projection rules.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.2 Required tests\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.1 test_basis_registry_lists_only_current_weight_basis_families shall verify that the supported weight-basis registry contains chebyshev and dct, and does not include conventional as a compact weight basis.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.2 test_basis_registry_exposes_stable_artifact_tags_and_versions shall verify that chebyshev maps to artifact tag CHEBY and version chebyshev_first_kind_qr_v1, and dct maps to artifact tag DCT and version dct_ii_orthonormal_v1.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.3 test_basis_registry_normalizes_legacy_aliases_without_changing_family_identity shall verify existing aliases such as cheby, dct_ii, and version strings normalize to the canonical family names.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.4 test_basis_registry_build_basis_matches_existing_build_stabilized_basis shall verify that registry-mediated basis_matrix output exactly matches the existing build_stabilized_basis output for representative Chebyshev and DCT cases.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.5 test_basis_registry_cache_key_uses_canonical_family_and_version shall verify that cache keys use canonical family names and reject mismatched basis versions.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.6 test_compact_identity_uses_registry_basis_families_and_versions shall verify that compact identity basis families and basis-version normalization are driven by the registry rather than a duplicated local list.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.7 test_basis_registry_marks_native_products_as_deferred shall verify that supports_native_products is false for DCT and false for current Chebyshev weight-basis support until the later Chebyshev-native model explicitly adds product algebra.\par
\pard\sa160 2.2.8 test_unknown_basis_family_fails_at_registry_boundary shall verify that unknown basis families fail with a clear ValueError before materialisation.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.3 Non-regression checks\b0\fs22\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.1 Existing Chebyshev and DCT orthonormality tests shall continue to pass.\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.2 Existing compact identity tests shall continue to pass.\par
\pard\sa160 2.3.3 Existing wrappers may continue to validate chebyshev and dct explicitly; wrapper generalisation is not part of Stage 0.5.\par
\pard\b\fs26 2.4 Commands\b0\fs22\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 python -m unittest tests.test_basis_registry_shim\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 python -m unittest tests.test_sheet_stage6_canonical_naming\par
\pard\f2\fs18\sa80 python -m unittest discover tests\par
\pard\sa220\i End of Stage 0.5 test plan.\i0\par
}
