{\rtf1\ansi\deff0
{\fonttbl{\f0 Times New Roman;}{\f1 Courier New;}}
\paperw11906\paperh16838\margl1134\margr1134\margt1134\margb1134
\widowctrl\f0\fs23
\pard\qc\sa240\f0\fs34\b THOG2 Stage 0 Test Plan\b0\par
\pard\qc\sa320\f0\fs22 Audit and baseline fixtures before compact-geometry refactor\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Summary\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Stage 0 is a guard rail stage. It captures current legacy CHEBY_SHEET_COL behaviour before later stages move the implementation behind new abstractions.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Stage 0 must not implement CURVE, MLP_BLOCK, HEAD_AWARE_BLOCK, BLOCK, or DCT.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Fixture\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 The fixture lives at tests/fixtures/stage0_legacy_sheet_col_fixture.json.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 It records a tiny deterministic config, family shapes, coefficient shapes, parameter counts, basis hashes, head packing ranges, and selected materialized tensor values.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Required tests\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Family tests verify stable family order, row widths, row orders, coefficient shapes, sheet parameter counts, and dense-equivalent counts.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Parameter tests verify public parameter_report totals.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Basis tests verify CHEBY basis hashes and non-persistent basis buffers.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Materialization tests verify selected layer-2 tensor values from a fixed seed.\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Attention packing tests verify Q/K/V row ranges, per-head row ranges, and attention-output input-head column ranges.\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Commands\b0\par
\pard\sa180\li360\f1\fs20 python -m unittest tests.test_stage0_legacy_sheet_col_baseline\line python -m unittest discover tests\par
\pard\sa190\sb280\f0\fs29\b Exit gate\b0\par
\pard\sa170\f0\fs23 Stage 0 is complete when the new Stage 0 test passes and existing test discovery still passes.\par
}
